1 2  Mother  Sea 

tremblings  of  the  earth  and  with  the  fire  and  smoke  of  roaring 
volcanoes,  mountains  rose  and  wore  away,  glaciers  moved  to  and 

fro  over  the  earth,  and  the  sea  crept  over  the  continents  and 
again  receded. 

It  was  not  until  Silurian  time,  some  350  million  years  ago,  that 
the  first  pioneer  of  land  life  crept  out  on  the  shore.  It  was  an 
arthropod,  one  of  the  great  tribe  that  later  produced  crabs  and 
lobsters  and  insects.  It  must  have  been  something  like  a  modern 
scorpion,  but,  unlike  some  of  its  descendants,  it  never  wholly 
severed  the  ties  that  united  it  to  the  sea.  It  lived  a  strange  life, 
half-terrestrial,  half-aquatic,  something  like  that  of  the  ghost 
crabs  that  speed  along  the  beaches  today,  now  and  then  dashing 
into  the  surf  to  moisten  their  gills. 

Fish,  tapered  of  body  and  stream-molded  by  the  press  of  run¬ 
ning  waters,  were  evolving  in  Silurian  rivers.  In  times  of  drought, 
in  the  drying  pools  and  lagoons,  the  shortage  of  oxygen  forced 
them  to  develop  swim  bladders  for  the  storage  of  air.  One  form 
that  possessed  an  air-breathing  lung  was  able  to  survive  the  dry 
periods  by  burying  itself  in  mud,  leaving  a  passage  to  the  surface 
through  which  it  breathed. 

It  is  very  doubtful  that  the  animals  alone  would  have  suc¬ 
ceeded  in  colonizing  the  land,  for  only  the  plants  had  the  power 
to  bring  about  the  first  amelioration  of  its  harsh  conditions.  They 
helped  make  soil  of  the  crumbling  rocks,  they  held  back  the  soil 
from  the  rains  that  would  have  swept  it  away,  and  little  by  little 
they  softened  and  subdued  the  bare  rock,  the  lifeless  desert.  We 
know  very  little  about  the  first  land  plants,  but  they  must  have 
been  closely  related  to  some  of  the  larger  seaweeds  that  had 
learned  to  live  in  the  coastal  shallows,  developing  strengthened 
stems  and  grasping,  rootlike  holdfasts  to  resist  the  drag  and  pull 
of  the  waves.  Perhaps  it  was  in  some  coastal  lowlands,  periodi¬ 
cally  drained  and  flooded,  that  some  such  plants  found  it  pos¬ 
sible  to  survive,  though  separated  from  the  sea.  This  also  seems 
to  have  taken  place  in  the  Silurian  period. 

The  mountains  that  had  been  thrown  up  by  the  Laurentian 
revolution  gradually  wore  away,  and  as  the  sediments  were 
washed  from  their  summits  and  deposited  on  the  lowlands,  great 


The  Gray  Beginnings 


*3 


areas  of  the  continents  sank  under  the  load.  The  seas  crept  out 
of  their  basins  and  spread  over  the  lands.  Life  fared  well  and  was 
exceedingly  abundant  in  those  shallow,  sunlit  seas.  But  with  the 
later  retreat  of  the  ocean  water  into  the  deeper  basins,  many 
creatures  must  have  been  left  stranded  in  shallow,  landlocked 
bays.  Some  of  these  animals  found  means  to  survive  on  land.  The 
lakes,  the  shores  of  the  rivers,  and  the  coastal  swamps  of  those 
days  were  the  testing  grounds  in  which  plants  and  animals  either 
became  adapted  to  the  new  conditions  or  perished. 

As  the  lands  rose  and  the  seas  receded,  a  strange  fishlike  crea¬ 
ture  emerged  on  the  land,  and  over  the  thousands  of  years  its 
fins  became  legs,  and  instead  of  gills  it  developed  lungs.  In  the 
Devonian  sandstone  this  first  amphibian  left  its  footprint. 

On  land  and  sea  the  stream  of  life  poured  on.  New  forms 
evolved;  some  old  ones  declined  and  disappeared.  On  land  the 
mosses  and  the  ferns  and  the  seed  plants  developed.  The  reptiles 
for  a  time  dominated  the  earth,  gigantic,  grotesque,  and  terrify¬ 
ing.  Birds  learned  to  live  and  move  in  the  ocean  of  air.  The  first 
small  mammals  lurked  inconspicuously  in  hidden  crannies  of  the 
earth  as  though  in  fear  of  the  reptiles. 

When  they  went  ashore  the  animals  that  took  up  a  land  life 
carried  with  them  a  part  of  the  sea  in  their  bodies,  a  heritage 
which  they  passed  on  to  their  children  and  which  even  today 
links  each  land  animal  with  its  origin  in  the  ancient  sea.  Fish, 
amphibian,  and  reptile,  warm-blooded  bird  and  mammal— each 
of  us  carries  in  our  veins  a  salty  stream  in  which  the  elements 
sodium,  potassium,  and  calcium  are  combined  in  almost  the 
same  proportions  as  in  sea  water.  This  is  our  inheritance  from 
the  day,  untold  millions  of  years  ago,  when  a  remote  ancestor, 
having  progressed  from  the  one-celled  to  the  many-celled  stage, 
first  developed  a  circulatory  system  in  which  the  fluid  was 
merely  the  water  of  the  sea.  In  the  same  way,  our  lime-hardened 
skeletons  are  a  heritage  from  the  calcium-rich  ocean  of  Cambrian 
time.  Even  the  protoplasm  that  streams  within  each  cell  of  our 
bodies  has  the  chemical  structure  impressed  upon  all  living  mat¬ 
ter  when  the  first  simple  creatures  were  brought  forth  in  the 
ancient  sea.  And  as  life  itself  began  in  the  sea,  so  each  of  us 


*4  Mother  Sea 

begins  his  individual  life  in  a  miniature  ocean  within  his 
mother  s  womb,  and  in  the  stages  of  his  embryonic  development 
repeats  the  steps  by  which  his  race  evolved,  from  gill-breathing 
inhabitants  of  a  water  world  to  creatures  able  to  live  on  land. 

Some  of  the  land  animals  later  returned  to  the  ocean.  After 
perhaps  50  million  years  of  land  life,  a  number  of  reptiles  entered 
the  sea  about  170  million  years  ago,  in  the  Triassic  period.  They 
were  huge  and  formidable  creatures.  Some  had  oarlike  limbs  by 
which  they  rowed  through  the  water;  some  were  web-footed, 
with  long,  serpentine  necks.  These  grotesque  monsters  disap¬ 
peared  millions  of  years  ago,  but  we  remember  them  when  we 
come  upon  a  large  sea  turtle  swimming  many  miles  at  sea,  its 
barnacle-encrusted  shell  eloquent  of  its  marine  life.  Much  later, 
perhaps  no  more  than  50  million  years  ago,  some  of  the  mam¬ 
mals,  too,  abandoned  a  land  life  for  the  ocean.  Their  descend¬ 
ants  are  the  sea  lions,  seals,  sea  elephants,  and  whales  of  today. 

Among  the  land  mammals  there  was  a  race  of  creatures  that 
took  to  an  arboreal  existence.  Their  hands  underwent  remark¬ 
able  development,  becoming  skilled  in  manipulating  and  exam¬ 
ining  objects,  and  along  with  this  skill  came  a  superior  brain 
power  that  compensated  for  what  these  comparatively  small 
mammals  lacked  in  strength.  At  last,  perhaps  somewhere  in  the 
vast  interior  of  Asia,  they  descended  from  the  trees  and  became 
again  terrestrial.  The  past  million  years  have  seen  their  transfor¬ 
mation  into  beings  with  the  body  and  brain  and  spirit  of  man. 

Eventually  man,  too,  found  his  way  back  to  the  sea.  Standing 
on  its  shores,  he  must  have  looked  out  upon  it  with  wonder  and 
curiosity,  compounded  with  an  unconscious  recognition  of  his 
lineage.  He  could  not  physically  re-enter  the  ocean  as  the  seals 
and  whales  had  done.  But  over  the  centuries,  with  all  the  skill 
and  ingenuity  and  reasoning  powers  of  his  mind,  he  has  sought 
to  explore  and  investigate  even  its  most  remote  parts,  so  that  he 
might  re-enter  it  mentally  and  imaginatively. 

He  built  boats  to  venture  out  on  its  surface.  Later  he  found 
ways  to  descend  to  the  shallow  parts  of  its  floor,  carrying  with 
him  the  air  that,  as  a  land  mammal  long  unaccustomed  to 
aquatic  life,  he  needed  to  breathe.  Moving  in  fascination  over 


The  Gray  Beginnings 


*5 


the  deep  sea  he  could  not  enter,  he  found  ways  to  probe  its 
depths,  he  let  down  nets  to  capture  its  life,  he  invented  mechani¬ 
cal  eyes  and  ears  that  could  re-create  for  his  senses  a  world  long 
lost,  but  a  world  that,  in  the  deepest  part  of  his  subconscious 
mind,  he  had  never  wholly  forgotten. 

And  yet  he  has  returned  to  his  mother  sea  only  on  her  own 
terms.  He  cannot  control  or  change  the  ocean  as,  in  his  brief 
tenancy  of  earth,  he  has  subdued  and  plundered  the  continents. 
In  the  artificial  world  of  his  cities  and  towns,  he  often  forgets 
the  true  nature  of  his  planet  and  the  long  vistas  of  its  history,  in 
which  the  existence  of  the  race  of  men  has  occupied  a  mere  mo¬ 
ment  of  time.  The  sense  of  all  these  things  comes  to  him  most 
clearly  in  the  course  of  a  long  ocean  voyage,  when  he  watches 
day  after  day  the  receding  rim  of  the  horizon,  ridged  and  fur¬ 
rowed  by  waves;  when  at  night  he  becomes  aware  of  the  earth  s 
rotation  as  the  stars  pass  overhead;  or  when,  alone  in  this  world 
of  water  and  sky,  he  feels  the  loneliness  of  his  earth  in  space. 
And  then,  as  never  on  land,  he  knows  the  truth  that  his  world 
is  a  water  world,  a  planet  dominated  by  its  covering  mantle  of 
ocean,  in  which  the  continents  are  but  transient  intrusions  of 
land  above  the  surface  of  the  all-encircling  sea. 


The  Pattern  of  the  Surface 


THERE  IS,  ONE  KNOWS  NOT  WHAT  SWEET  MYSTERY  ABOUT 
THIS  SEA,  WHOSE  GENTLY  AWFUL  STIRRINGS  SEEM 
TO  SPEAK  OF  SOME  HIDDEN  SOUL  BENEATH. 

— Herman  Melville 


N  O WHERE  in  all  the  sea  does  life  exist  in  such  bewilder¬ 
ing  abundance  as  in  the  surface  waters.  From  the  deck  of  a 
vessel  you  may  look  down,  hour  after  hour,  on  the  shimmering 
discs  of  jellyfish,  their  gently  pulsating  bells  dotting  the  surface 
as  far  as  you  can  see.  Or  one  day  you  may  notice  early  in  the 
morning  that  you  are  passing  through  a  sea  that  has  taken  on  a 
brick-red  color  from  billions  upon  billions  of  microscopic  crea¬ 
tures,  each  of  which  contains  an  orange  pigment  granule.  At 
noon  you  are  still  moving  through  red  seas,  and  when  darkness 
falls  the  waters  shine  with  an  eerie  glow  from  the  phosphorescent 
fires  of  yet  more  billions  and  trillions  of  these  same  creatures. 

And  again  you  may  glimpse  not  only  the  abundance  but  some¬ 
thing  of  the  fierce  uncompromisingness  of  sea  life  when,  as  you 
look  over  the  rail  and  down,  down  into  water  of  a  clear,  deep 
green,  suddenly  there  passes  a  silver  shower  of  finger-long  fish- 
lets.  The  sun  strikes  a  metallic  gleam  from  their  flanks  as  they 
streak  by,  driving  deeper  into  the  green  depths  with  the  desper¬ 
ate  speed  of  the  hunted.  Perhaps  you  never  see  the  hunters,  but 


The  Pattern  of  the  Surface 
