ou  sense  their  presence  as  you  see  the  gulls  hovering,  with  eager, 
mewing  cries,  waiting  for  the  little  fish  to  be  driven  to  the  sur¬ 
face. 

Or  again,  perhaps,  you  may  sail  for  days  on  end  without  seeing 
anything  you  could  recognize  as  life  or  the  indications  of  life,  day 
after  day  of  empty  water  and  empty  sky,  and  so  you  may  reason¬ 
ably  conclude  that  there  is  no  spot  on  earth  so  barren  of  life  as 
the  open  ocean.  But  if  you  had  the  opportunity  to  tow  a  fine- 
meshed  net  through  the  seemingly  lifeless  water  and  then  to 
examine  the  washings  of  the  net,  you  would  find  that  life  is  scat¬ 
tered  almost  everywhere  through  the  surface  waters  like  a  fine 
dust.  A  cupful  of  water  may  contain  millions  upon  millions  of 
diatoms,  tiny  plant  cells,  each  of  them  far  too  small  to  be  seen 
by  the  human  eye;  or  it  may  swarm  with  an  infinitude  of  animal 
creatures,  none  larger  than  a  dust  mote,  which  live  on  plant  cells 
still  smaller  than  themselves. 

If  you  could  be  close  to  the  surface  waters  of  the  ocean  at 
night,  you  would  realize  that  then  they  are  alive  with  myriads  of 
strange  creatures  never  seen  by  day.  They  are  alive  with  the 
moving  lamps  of  small  shrimplike  beings  that  spend  the  daylight 
hours  in  the  gloom  of  deep  water,  and  with  the  shadowy  forms 
of  hungry  fish  and  the  dark  shapes  of  squid.  These  things  were 
seen,  as  few  men  have  seen  them,  by  the  Norwegian  ethnologist 
Thor  Heyerdahl  in  the  course  of  one  of  the  most  unusual  jour¬ 
neys  of  modern  times.  In  the  summer  of  1947  Heyerdahl  and  five 
companions  drifted  4300  miles  across  the  Pacific  on  a  raft  of 
balsa  logs,  to  test  a  theory  that  the  original  inhabitants  of  Poly¬ 
nesia  might  have  come  from  South  America  by  raft.  For  101  days 
and  nights  these  men  lived  practically  on  the  surface  of  the  sea, 
driven  by  the  trade  wind,  carried  on  the  strong  drift  of  the  Equa¬ 
torial  Current,  as  much  a  part  of  the  inexorable  westward  move¬ 
ment  of  wind  and  water  as  the  creatures  of  the  sea.  Because  of 
his  enviable  opportunity  to  observe  the  life  of  the  surface  while 
living  as  an  actual  part  of  it  for  so  many  weeks,  I  asked  Mr. 
Heyerdahl  about  some  of  his  impressions,  especially  of  the  sea  at 
night,  and  he  has  written  me  as  follows: 


1 0  Mother  Sea 

Chiefly  at  night,  but  occasionally  in  broad  daylight,  a  shoal  of 
small  squids  shot  out  of  the  water  precisely  like  flying  fish,  gliding 
through  the  air  as  much  as  up  to  six  feet  above  the  surface,  until 
they  lost  the  speed  accumulated  below  water,  and  fell  down  help¬ 
lessly.  In  their  gliding  flight  with  flaps  out  they  were  so  much  like 
small  flying  fish  at  a  distance,  that  we  had  no  idea  we  saw  anything 
unusual  until  a  live  squid  flew  right  into  one  of  the  crew  and  fell 
down  on  deck.  Almost  every  night  we  found  one  or  two  on  the 
deck  or  on  the  roof  of  the  bamboo  hut. 

It  was  my  own  definite  impression  that  the  marine  life  in  gen¬ 
eral  went  deeper  down  in  the  daytime  than  during  the  nights,  and 
that  the  darker  the  night  was,  the  more  life  we  had  around  us. 
At  two  different  occasions,  a  snake-mackerel,  Cempylus,  never  be¬ 
fore  seen  by  man  except  as  skeletal  remains  washed  ashore  on 
South  America  and  the  Galapagos,  came  jumping  clear  out  of  the 
water  and  right  up  on  the  raft  (once  right  into  the  hut) .  To  judge 
from  the  huge  eyes  and  the  fact  that  the  fish  has  never  before 
been  observed,  I  am  inclined  to  suspect  that  it  is  a  deep-sea  fish 
that  comes  to  the  surface  only  at  night. 

On  dark  nights  we  could  see  much  marine  life  which  we  were 
unable  to  identify.  They  seemed  to  be  deep-sea  fishes  approaching 
the  surface  at  night.  Generally  we  saw  it  as  vaguely  phosphores¬ 
cent  bodies,  often  the  size  and  shape  of  a  dinner  plate,  but  at  least 
one  night  in  the  shape  of  three  immense  bodies  of  irregular  and 
changing  shape  and  dimensions  which  appeared  to  exceed  those 
of  the  raft  (Kon-tiki  measured  about  45  by  18  feet).  Apart  from 
these  greater  bodies,  we  observed  occasionally  great  quantities  of 
phosphorescent  plankton,  often  containing  illuminating  copepods 
up  to  the  size  of  a  millimeter  or  more. 

With  these  surface  waters,  through  a  series  of  delicately  ad¬ 
justed,  interlocking  relationships,  the  life  of  all  parts  of  the  sea 
is  linked.  What  happens  to  a  diatom  in  the  upper,  sunlit  strata 
of  the  sea  may  well  determine  what  happens  to  a  cod  lying  on  a 
ledge  of  some  rocky  canyon  a  hundred  fathoms  below,  or  to  a 
bed  of  multicolored,  gorgeously  plumed  seaworms  carpeting  an 
underlying  shoal,  or  to  a  prawn  creeping  over  the  soft  oozes  of 
the  sea  floor  in  the  blackness  of  mile-deep  water. 

The  activities  of  the  microscopic  vegetables  of  the  sea,  of 
which  the  diatoms  are  most  important,  make  the  mineral  wealth 


The  Pattern  of  the  Surface 


*9 


of  the  water  available  to  the  animals.  Feeding  directly  on  the 
diatoms  and  other  groups  of  minute  unicellular  algae  are  the 
marine  protozoa,  many  crustaceans,  the  young  of  crabs,  bar¬ 
nacles,  sea  worms,  and  fishes.  Hordes  of  the  small  carnivores,  the 
first  link  in  the  chain  of  flesh  eaters,  move  among  these  peaceful 
grazers.  There  are  fierce  little  dragons  half  an  inch  long,  the 
sharp-jawed  arrowworms.  There  are  gooseberrylike  comb  jellies, 
armed  with  grasping  tentacles,  and  there  are  the  shrimplike 
euphausiids  that  strain  food  from  the  water  with  their  bristly 
appendages.  Since  they  drift  where  the  currents  carry  them,  with 
no  power  or  will  to  oppose  that  of  the  sea,  this  strange  commu¬ 
nity  of  creatures  and  the  marine  plants  that  sustain  them  are 
called  'plankton,’  a  word  derived  from  the  Greek,  meaning 
'wandering.’ 

From  the  plankton  the  food  chains  lead  on,  to  the  schools  of 
plankton-feeding  fishes  like  the  herring,  menhaden,  and  mack¬ 
erel;  to  the  fish-eating  fishes  like  the  bluefish  and  tuna  and 
sharks;  to  the  pelagic  squids  that  prey  on  fishes;  to  the  great 
whales  who,  according  to  their  species  but  not  according  to  their 
size,  may  live  on  fishes,  on  shrimps,  or  on  some  of  the  smallest 
of  the  plankton  creatures. 

Unmarked  and  trackless  though  it  may  seem  to  us,  the  surface 
of  the  ocean  is  divided  into  definite  zones,  and  the  pattern  of  the 
surface  water  controls  the  distribution  of  its  life.  Fishes  and 
plankton,  whales  and  squids,  birds  and  sea  turtles,  all  are  linked 
by  unbreakable  ties  to  certain  kinds  of  water— to  warm  water  or 
cold  water,  to  clear  or  turbid  water,  to  water  rich  in  phosphates 
or  in  silicates.  For  the  animals  higher  in  the  food  chains  the  ties 
are  less  direct;  they  are  bound  to  water  where  their  food  is  plen¬ 
tiful,  and  the  food  animals  are  there  because  the  water  condi¬ 
tions  are  right. 

The  change  from  zone  to  zone  may  be  abrupt.  It  may  come 
upon  us  unseen,  as  our  ship  at  night  crosses  an  invisible  bound¬ 
ary  line.  So  Charles  Darwin  on  H.M.S.  Beagle  one  dark  night  off 
the  coast  of  South  America  crossed  from  tropical  water  into  that 
of  the  cool  south.  Instantly  the  vessel  was  surrounded  by  numer¬ 
ous  seals  and  penguins,  which  made  such  a  bedlam  of  strange 


20 


Mother  Sea 


noises  that  the  officer  on  watch  was  deceived  into  thinking  the 
ship  had,  by  some  miscalculation,  run  close  inshore,  and  that  the 
sounds  he  heard  were  the  bellowing  of  cattle. 

To  the  human  senses,  the  most  obvious  patterning  of  the  sur¬ 
face  waters  is  indicated  by  color.  The  deep  blue  water  of  the 
open  sea  far  from  land  is  the  color  of  emptiness  and  barrenness; 
the  green  water  of  the  coastal  areas,  with  all  its  varying  hues,  is 
the  color  of  life.  The  sea  is  blue  because  the  sunlight  is  reflected 
back  to  our  eyes  from  the  water  molecules  or  from  very  minute 
particles  suspended  in  the  sea.  In  the  journey  of  the  light  rays 
into  deep  water  all  the  red  rays  and  most  of  the  yellow  rays  of 
the  spectrum  have  been  absorbed,  so  when  the  light  returns  to 
our  eyes  it  is  chiefly  the  cool  blue  rays  that  we  see.  Where  the 
water  is  rich  in  plankton,  it  loses  the  glassy  transparency  that 
permits  this  deep  penetration  of  the  light  rays.  The  yellow  and 
brown  and  green  hues  of  the  coastal  waters  are  derived  from  the 
minute  algae  and  other  microorganisms  so  abundant  there. 
Seasonal  abundance  of  certain  forms  containing  reddish  or 
brown  pigments  may  cause  the  'red  water'  known  from  ancient 
times  in  many  parts  of  the  world,  and  so  common  in  this  con¬ 
dition  in  some  enclosed  seas  that  they  owe  their  names  to  it — 
the  Red  Sea  and  the  Vermilion  Sea  are  examples. 

The  colors  of  the  sea  are  only  the  indirect  signs  of  the  pres¬ 
ence  or  absence  of  conditions  needed  to  support  the  surface  life; 
other  zones,  invisible  to  the  eye,  are  the  ones  that  largely  deter¬ 
mine  where  marine  creatures  may  live.  For  the  sea  is  by  no 
means  a  uniform  solution  of  water;  parts  of  it  are  more  salty  than 
others,  and  parts  are  warmer  or  colder. 

The  saltiest  ocean  water  in  the  world  is  that  of  the  Red  Sea, 
where  the  burning  sun  and  the  fierce  heat  of  the  atmosphere 
produce  such  rapid  evaporation  that  the  salt  content  is  40  parts 
per  thousand.  The  Sargasso  Sea,  an  area  of  high  air  temperatures, 
receiving  no  inflow  of  river  water  or  melting  ice  because  of  its 
remoteness  from  land,  is  the  saltiest  part  of  the  Atlantic,  which 
in  turn  is  the  saltiest  of  the  oceans.  The  polar  seas,  as  one  would 
expect,  are  the  least  salty,  because  they  are  constantly  being 
diluted  by  rain,  snow,  and  melting  ice.  Along  the  Atlantic  coast 


The  Pattern  of  the  Surface 


21 


of  the  United  States,  the  salinity  range  from  about  33  parts  per 
thousand  off  Cape  Cod  to  about  36  off  Florida  is  a  difference 
easily  perceptible  to  the  senses  of  human  bathers. 

Ocean  temperatures  vary  from  about  28°  F.  in  polar  seas  to 
96°  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  which  contains  the  hottest  ocean  water 
in  the  world.  To  creatures  of  the  sea,  which  with  few  exceptions 
must  match  in  their  own  bodies  the  temperature  of  the  sur¬ 
rounding  water,  this  range  is  tremendous,  and  change  of  tem¬ 
perature  is  probably  the  most  important  single  condition  that 
controls  the  distribution  of  marine  animals. 

The  beautiful  reef  corals  are  a  perfect  example  of  the  way  the 
inhabitable  areas  for  any  particular  class  of  creatures  may  be 
established  by  temperatures.  If  you  took  a  map  of  the  world  and 
drew  a  line  30°  north  of  the  equator  and  another  30°  south  of 
it,  you  would  have  outlined  in  general  the  waters  where  reef 
corals  are  found  at  the  present  time.  It  is  true  that  the  remains 
of  ancient  coral  reefs  have  been  discovered  in  arctic  waters,  but 
this  means  that  in  some  past  ages  the  climate  of  these  northern 
seas  was  tropical.  The  calcareous  structure  of  the  coral  reef  can 
be  fashioned  only  in  water  at  least  as  warm  as  70°  Fahrenheit. 
We  would  have  to  make  one  northward  extension  of  our  map, 
where  the  Gulf  Stream  carries  water  warm  enough  for  corals  to 
Bermuda,  at  320  north  latitude.  On  the  other  hand,  within  our 
tropical  belt,  we  would  have  to  erase  large  areas  on  the  west 
coasts  of  South  America  and  Africa,  where  upwelling  of  cold 
water  from  lower  ocean  levels  prevents  the  growth  of  corals. 
Most  of  the  east  coast  of  Florida  has  no  coral  reefs  because  of 
a  cool  inshore  current,  running  southward  between  the  coast  and 
the  Gulf  Stream. 

As  between  tropical  and  polar  regions,  the  differences  in  the 
kinds  and  abundance  of  life  are  tremendous.  The  warm  tem¬ 
peratures  of  the  tropics  speed  up  the  processes  of  reproduction 
and  growth,  so  that  many  generations  are  produced  in  the  time 
required  to  bring  one  to  maturity  in  cold  seas.  There  is  more 
opportunity  for  genetic  mutations  to  be  produced  within  a  given 
time;  hence  the  bewildering  variety  of  tropical  life.  Yet  in  any 
species  there  are  far  fewer  individuals  than  in  the  colder  zones, 
