where  the  mineral  content  of  the  water  is  richer,  and  there  are 
no  dense  swarms  of  surface  plankton,  like  the  copepods  of  the 
Arctic.  The  pelagic,  or  free-swimming,  forms  of  the  tropics  live 
deeper  than  those  of  the  colder  regions,  and  so  there  is  less  food 
for  large  surface-feeders.  In  the  tropics,  therefore,  the  sea  birds 
do  not  compare  in  abundance  with  the  clouds  of  shearwaters, 
fulmars,  auks,  whalebirds,  albatrosses,  and  other  birds  seen  over 
far  northern  or  far  southern  fishing  grounds. 

In  the  cold-water  communities  of  the  polar  seas,  fewer  of  the 
animals  have  swimming  larvae.  Generation  after  generation  set¬ 
tle  down  near  the  parents,  so  that  large  areas  of  bottom  may  be 
covered  with  the  descendants  of  a  very  few  animals.  In  the 
Barents  Sea  a  research  vessel  once  brought  up  more  than  a  ton 
of  one  of  the  siliceous  sponges  at  a  single  haul,  and  enormous 
patches  of  a  single  species  of  annelid  worm  carpet  the  east  coast 
of  Spitsbergen.  Copepods  and  swimming  snails  fill  the  surface 
waters  of  the  cold  seas,  and  lure  the  herring  and  the  mackerel, 
the  flocks  of  sea  birds,  the  whales,  and  the  seals. 

In  the  tropics,  then,  sea  life  is  intense,  vivid,  and  infinitely 
varied.  In  cold  seas  it  proceeds  at  a  pace  slowed  by  the  icy  water 
in  which  it  exists,  but  the  mineral  richness  of  these  waters 
(largely  a  result  of  seasonal  overturn  and  consequent  mixing) 
makes  possible  the  enormous  abundance  of  the  forms  that  in¬ 
habit  them.  For  a  good  many  years  it  has  been  said  categorically 
that  the  total  productivity  of  the  colder  temperate  and  polar 
seas  is  far  greater  than  the  tropical.  Now  it  is  becoming  plain 
that  there  are  important  exceptions  to  this  statement.  In  certain 
tropical  and  subtropical  waters,  there  are  areas  where  the  sheer 
abundance  of  life  rivals  the  Grand  Banks  or  the  Barents  Sea  or 
any  antarctic  whaling  ground.  Perhaps  the  best  examples  are 
the  Humboldt  Current,  off  the  west  coast  of  South  America, 
and  the  Benguela  Current,  off  the  west  coast  of  Africa.  In  both 
currents,  upwelling  of  cold,  mineral-laden  water  from  deeper 
layers  of  the  sea  provides  the  fertilizing  elements  to  sustain  the 
great  food  chains. 

And  wherever  two  currents  meet,  especially  if  they  differ 
sharply  in  temperature  or  salinity,  there  are  zones  of  great  tur- 


The  Pattern  of  the  Surface 


23 


bulence  and  unrest,  with  water  sinking  or  rising  up  from  the 
depths  and  with  shifting  eddies  and  foam  lines  at  the  surface. 
At  such  places  the  richness  and  abundance  of  marine  life  reveals 
itself  most  strikingly.  This  changing  life,  seen  as  his  ship  cut 
across  the  pathways  of  the  great  currents  of  the  Pacific  and  the 
Atlantic,  was  described  with  vivid  detail  by  S.  C.  Brooks: 

Within  a  few  degrees  of  the  equator,  the  scattered  cumulus 
clouds  become  thicker  and  grayer,  a  confused  swell  makes  up, 
rain  squalls  come  and  go,  and  birds  appear.  At  first  there  is  only 
a  greater  abundance  of  storm  petrels,  with  here  and  there  petrels 
of  other  kinds  hunting  along  utterly  indifferent  to  the  ship,  or 
small  groups  of  tropic  birds  flying  along  with  the  ship,  off  to  one 
side  or  high  overhead.  Then  scattered  groups  of  various  petrels 
appear,  and  finally  for  an  hour  or  two  there  are  birds  on  every 
hand.  If  one  is  not  too  far  from  land,  a  few  hundred  miles  per¬ 
haps,  as  in  the  case  of  the  south  equatorial  drift  north  of  the 
Marquesas,  one  may  also  see  multitudes  of  sooty  or  crested  terns. 
Occasionally  one  sees  the  grayish  blue  form  of  a  shark  gliding 
along,  or  a  big  purplish-brown  hammerhead  lazily  twisting  around 
as  though  trying  to  get  a  better  view  of  the  ship.  Flying  fish, 
while  not  so  closely  localized  as  the  birds,  are  breaking  the  water 
every  few  seconds,  and  bewitch  the  beholder  by  their  myriad 
sizes,  shapes,  and  antics,  and  their  bewildering  patterns  and 
shades  of  deep  brown,  opal  blue,  yellow  and  purple.  Then  the 
sun  comes  out  again,  the  sea  takes  on  its  deep  tropical  blue,  the 
birds  become  more  and  more  scarce,  and  gradually,  as  the  ship 
moves  on,  the  ocean  resumes  its  desert  aspect. 

If  it  were  daylight  all  the  time,  this  same  sequence  might  be 
seen  in  a  more  or  less  striking  fashion  twice  or  perhaps  even  three 
or  four  times.  Inquiry  soon  reveals  that  this  sequence  marks  the 
time  of  passing  the  edge  of  one  of  the  great  currents  .  .  . 
