
of  sharks  and  more  of  porpoise  racing  with  the  cut-water  or  dog¬ 
gedly  hurrying,  school  after  school,  toward  some  unguessable 
objective.  The  flashing  black  and  white  of  the  young  orcas,  or  the 
distant  sudden  spurt  and  lazy  drift  of  a  whale's  spouting,  lend 
life  to  the  water,  as  do  the  antics  of  flying  fish,  distant  though 
they  be  from  their  traditional  home  in  the  tropics  .  .  .  One  may 
pass  from  the  blue  water  of  the  Stream,  with  floating  gulf  weed 
(Sargassum),  and  perhaps  here  and  there  the  iridescent  float  of 
a  Portuguese  man-of-war,  into  the  gray-green  water  of  the  Arctic 
Current  with  its  thousands  of  jelly  fish,  and  in  a  few  hours  back 
again  into  the  Stream.  Each  time,  at  the  margin,  one  is  likely 
to  see  the  surface  display  of  that  abundance  of  life  which  has 
made  the  Grand  Banks  one  of  the  great  fisheries  of  the  world.* 

The  mid-ocean  regions,  bounded  by  the  currents  that  sweep 
around  the  ocean  basins,  are  in  general  the  deserts  of  the  sea. 
There  are  few  birds  and  few  surface-feeding  fishes,  and  indeed 
there  is  little  surface  plankton  to  attract  them.  The  life  of  these 
regions  is  largely  confined  to  deep  water.  The  Sargasso  Sea  is  an 
exception,  not  matched  in  the  anticyclonic  centers  of  other 
ocean  basins.  It  is  so  different  from  any  other  place  on  earth  that 
it  may  well  be  considered  a  definite  geographic  region.  A  line 
drawn  from  the  mouth  of  Chesapeake  Bay  to  Gibraltar  would 
skirt  its  northern  border;  another  from  Haiti  to  Dakar  would 
mark  its  southern  boundary.  It  lies  all  about  Bermuda  and  ex¬ 
tends  more  than  halfway  across  the  Atlantic,  its  entire  area  being 
roughly  as  large  as  the  United  States.  The  Sargasso,  with  all  its 
legendary  terrors  for  sailing  ships,  is  a  creation  of  the  great  cur¬ 
rents  of  the  North  Atlantic  that  encircle  it  and  bring  into  it  the 
millions  of  tons  of  floating  sargassum  weed  from  which  the  place 
derives  its  name,  and  all  the  weird  assemblage  of  animals  that 
live  in  the  weed. 

The  Sargasso  is  a  place  forgotten  by  the  winds,  undisturbed  by 
the  strong  flow  of  waters  that  girdle  it  as  with  a  river.  Under  the 
seldom-clouded  skies,  its  waters  are  warm  and  heavy  with  salt. 
Separated  widely  from  coastal  rivers  and  from  polar  ice,  there  is 
no  inflow  of  fresh  water  to  dilute  its  saltiness;  the  only  influx 

*  From  The  Condor,  vol.  36,  no.  5,  Sept.-Oct.  1934,  pp.  186-7. 


The  Pattern  of  the  Surface 


25 

is  of  saline  water  from  the  adjacent  currents,  especially  from  the 
Gulf  Stream  or  North  Atlantic  Current  as  it  crosses  from  Amer¬ 
ica  to  Europe.  And  with  the  little,  inflowing  streams  of  surface 
water  come  the  plants  and  animals  that  for  months  or  years  have, 
drifted  in  the  Gulf  Stream. 

The  sargassum  weeds  are  brown  algae  belonging  to  several 
species.  Quantities  of  the  weeds  live  attached  to  reefs  or  rocky 
outcroppings  off  the  coasts  of  the  West  Indies  and  Florida. 
Many  of  the  plants  are  torn  away  by  storms,  especially  during; 
the  hurricane  season.  They  are  picked  up  by  the  Gulf  Stream 
and  are  drifted  northward.  With  the  weeds  go,  as  involuntary 
passengers,  many  small  fishes,  crabs,  shrimps,  and  innumerable 
larvae  of  assorted  species  of  marine  creatures,  whose  home  had 
been  the  coastal  banks  of  sargassum  weed. 

Curious  things  happen  to  the  animals  that  have  ridden  on  the 
sargassum  weed  into  a  new  home.  Once  they  lived  near  the  sea’s 
edge,  a  few  feet  or  a  few  fathoms  below  the  surface,  but  never 
far  above  a  firm  bottom.  They  knew  the  rhythmic  movements 
of  waves  and  tides.  They  could  leave  the  shelter  of  the  weeds  at 
will  and  creep  or  swim  about  over  the  bottom  in  search  of  food. 
Now,  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean,  they  are  in  a  new  world.  The 
bottom  lies  two  or  three  miles  below  them.  Those  who  are  poor 
swimmers  must  cling  to  the  weed,  which  now  represents  a  life 
raft,  supporting  them  above  the  abyss.  Over  the  ages  since  their 
ancestors  came  here,  some  species  have  developed  special  organs 
of  attachment,  either  for  themselves  or  for  their  eggs,  so  that 
they  may  not  sink  into  the  cold,  dark  water  far  below.  The  flying 
fish  make  nests  of  the  weed  to  contain  their  eggs,  which  bear  an 
amazing  resemblance  to  the  sargassum  floats  or  Terries.’ 

Indeed,  many  of  the  little  marine  beasts  of  the  weedy  jungle 
seem  to  be  playing  an  elaborate  game  of  disguise  in  which  each 
is  camouflaged  to  hide  it  from  the  others.  The  Sargasso  sea  slug 
—a  snail  without  a  shell— has  a  soft,  shapeless  brown  body  spot¬ 
ted  with  dark-edged  circles  and  fringed  with  flaps  and  folds  of 
skin,  so  that  as  it  creeps  over  the  weed  in  search  of  prey  it  can 
scarcely  be  distinguished  from  the  vegetation.  One  of  the  fiercest 
carnivores  of  the  place,  the  sargassum  fish  Pterophryne,  has 


i6 


Mother  Sea 

copied  with  utmost  fidelity  the  branching  fronds  of  the  weed, 
its  golden  berries,  its  rich  brown  color,  and  even  the  white  dots 
of  encrusting  worm  tubes.  All  these  elaborate  bits  of  mimicry  are 
indications  of  the  fierce  internecine  wars  of  the  Sargasso  jungles, 

which  go  on  without  quarter  and  without  mercy  for  the  weak  or 
the  unwary. 

In  the  science  of  the  sea  there  has  been  a  long-standing  con¬ 
troversy  about  the  origin  of  the  drifting  weeds  of  the  Sargasso 
Sea.  Some  have  held  that  the  supply  is  maintained  by  weeds  re¬ 
cently  torn  away  from  coastal  beds;  others  say  that  the  rather 
limited  sargassum  fields  of  the  West  Indies  and  Florida  cannot 
possibly  supply  the  immense  area  of  the  Sargasso.  They  believe 
that  we  find  here  a  self-perpetuating  community  of  plants  that 
have  become  adapted  to  life  in  the  open  sea,  needing  no  roots 
or  holdfasts  for  attachment,  and  able  to  propagate  vegetatively. 
Probably  there  is  truth  in  both  ideas.  New  plants  do  come  in 
each  year  in  small  numbers,  and  now  cover  an  immense  area  be¬ 
cause  of  their  very  long  life  once  they  have  reached  this  quiet 
central  region  of  the  Atlantic. 

It  takes  about  half  a  year  for  the  plants  torn  from  West  Indian 
shores  to  reach  the  northern  border  of  the  Sargasso,  perhaps 
several  years  for  them  to  be  carried  into  the  inner  parts  of  this 
area.  Meanwhile,  some  have  been  swept  onto  the  shores  of 
North  America  by  storms,  others  have  been  killed  by  cold  during 
the  passage  from  offshore  New  England  across  the  Atlantic, 
where  the  Gulf  Stream  comes  into  contact  with  waters  from  the 
Arctic.  For  the  plants  that  reach  the  calm  of  the  Sargasso,  there 
is  virtual  immortality.  A.  E.  Parr  of  the  American  Museum  has 
recently  suggested  that  the  individual  plants  may  live,  some  for 
decades,  other  for  centuries,  according  to  their  species.  It  might 
well  be  that  some  of  the  very  weeds  you  would  see  if  you  visited 
the  place  today  were  seen  by  Columbus  and  his  men.  Here,  in 
the  heait  of  the  Atlantic,  the  weed  drifts  endlessly,  growing,  re¬ 
producing  vegetatively  by  a  process  of  fragmentation.  Appar¬ 
ently  almost  the  only  plants  that  die  are  the  ones  that  drift  into 
unfavorable  conditions  around  the  edges  of  the  Sargasso  or  are 
